---
layout: post
title: Project Team Effectivity and Adaptability
published: false
---

# Notes

- Following a process does not guarentee success.  It is the project
  team's capability to adapt to new situations, often outside of a
  defined process, that has a greater impact on the likelihood for
  success than following a process to the letter

- Hence we can draw the conclusion that processes are best suited for
  communication of established behavior, not for actual execution.

# Article

Several factors contribute to the success of a software delivery
project. Budget, process, technology choice, even circumstance all
have their role to play, but a strong project team that adapts quickly
to changes in their project's ecosystem is more likely to succeed than
an average team with limitless resources and strict adherence to a
methodology (be it Agile, waterfall or other). The key to this success
is the team's strength (or dominance) in its current environment
coupled with an ability to rapidly adapt to environmental changes
threatening the health of the project.  Essentially a project is a
social organism, one that needs a number of different resources to
sustain it; capital, people (and their availability), time and
stakeholder support.  The forces that affect the availability of these
resources come in a number of shapes and sizes.  One of these
competing forces is that of other project teams.  Competition amongst
individuals across teams can lead to resources being diverted to,
often politically, stronger project organisms. Without sufficient
resources the project slowly dies as it is no longer capable of fending
off predators while their energy is focused on delivering to the
project scope. Predators are many and varied for projects.  They
include technical difficulties, shifting business needs and changes to
the competitive landscape for an organiztion.  Cannabilization may
also occur as forces with the project, often friction between team
members or a lack of a specific capability, can waste valuable
resources.

As a project can be considered a social organism, rather than a
collection of individuals, the collective behavior of the team can
surpass the capabilities of the individuals that comprise it. While
project teams may be constructed with indiviuals that have specific
roles and responsibilities, the team is most effective when the
individuals take on roles that are attuned to the project's current
environment. What this means is that a developer may spend more time
doing analysis work, while an analyst might find themselves providing
support to other parts of the development team. None of these team
members are performing a lesser role than the one that they were
assigned for the project.  Rather, they are helping the project social
organism to survive by helping to be the most effective and adaptable
organism that the project requires.

In those cases where team members are unwilling to alter their role on
an Agile software delivery project team based upon the prevailing
conditions, the team is more susceptable to falling victim to the
changing environment as elements of it are unwilling to adapt.  At
times like these it may prove that an appropriate survival tactic is
to sever the part of the organism that is incapable of surviving in
the new environment rather than allowing the entire organization to
fail.

There are times that more resources become available to a project,
often leading to growth.  This change to the social organism may be
handled in a number of ways.  Often, especially in the case when
consultants or contractor are added to the team, the new additions are
treated as a virus, resulting in the existing bodies expending
resources to fight the foreign bodies.

